hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question what's behind the US pressure
for Israel to change its scorched Earth
strategy in Gaza let's get to the bottom
line in the Middle East the Biden
ministration is exactly at the point
where it never wanted to be literally
one week before the Hamas attack of
October 7th US National Security adviser
Jake Sullivan was saying in quote the
middle east region is quieter today than
it has been in two decades unquote now
it's round-the-clock crisis meetings and
one top Us official after the other
making trips to the region after months
of rejecting a full ceasefire Now
American officials and some Hardline
European allies like the UK and Germany
are hinting that they're not okay with
the brutality of Israel's war Israel's
strategy has been to punish the civilian
population of the Gaza Strip with
maximum damage killing and maming tens
of thousands of innocent Palestinians
and turning Gaza into a place where no
one can live so what's behind the slight
change in tune among Western powers and
what if anything will change in this war
today we're talking with Ian Bremer
president and founder of the Eurasia
group a firm that studies geopolitical
risk Ian thank you so much for joining
us look I I want our audience to know
that one of the uh reasons you're famous
in the world is for seeing crises coming
around the corner assessing and looking
at geopolitical risk that is out there
but I want to read to you a statement
made on the 29th of September by Jake
Sullivan uh the president's National
Security adviser he said the middle east
region is quieter today than it has been
in two decades now challenges remain
Iran's nuclear weapons program the
tensions between Israelis and
Palestinians but the amount of time that
I have to spend on crisis and conflict
in the Middle East today compared to any
of my predecessors going back to 9/11 is
significantly reduced so I want to ask
you Ian this was a week before October
7th and the Hamas attacks what didn't
Jake Sullivan see coming that you did
see coming well I mean first of all
let's let's recognize that many of the
things that Jake was talking about a
week before October 7th um are still in
place uh the Abraham Accords which
helped facilitate Israel normalizing
relations with countries around the
region
um and putting them in the best
geopolitical position that they had been
since independence of Israel um still
very much in place secondly a
breakthrough that was facilitated by the
Americans a breakthrough facilitated by
the Chinese between Iran and Saudi
Arabia that nobody thought possible
that's still very much in place in fact
it was after the October 7th terrorist
attacks that Muhammad bin Salman and
Iranian president RI spoke on the phone
for the first time and then RI traveled
to the Saudi Kingdom to meet with MBS
and with many other Gulf leaders so I
mean the the backdrop of the big powers
in the Middle East being able to engage
with each other and not be in a state of
war that was true before October 7th
that's true after October 7th but of
course the piece of Jake's quote that
really reads most
problematically is I haven't had to
spend any time on this compared to
anything else and since October 7th he's
been spending most of his time on it and
in fact he's been on shuttle diplomacy
back and forth to the region just as the
Secretary of Defense just as the
Secretary of State even President Biden
so what went wrong and what went wrong
is that everyone the
Israelis um and the gulf allies and the
Europeans and absolutely Americans for
years basically came to the conclusion
of well we don't we can't resolve Israel
Palestine so we'll just stuff it in a
box and perhaps we'll even literally
stuff the Palestinians in a box um and
we'll we'll make peace with the rest of
the region and we'll just get on keep on
keeping on and and what we saw on
October 7th is that that doesn't work
for the Palestinians and they can make
you pay for it um that's that's
basically the the singular piece um that
that Jake is missing is is Israel going
to be safer is it going to be able to
take out Hamas is there stability down
the road for Israel after what we've
seen unfold well there's two reasons why
they're not safer uh one is that you can
take out Hamas leadership and tunnels
and command and control and Fighters but
you will not uh as a consequence take
out the ideas the ideology that led to
Hamas in fact you'll strengthen it the
Americans learned this over decades with
the failed war on terror you can take
out Bin Laden and all of his henchmen
but you can't take out uh the extremism
and you see the Taliban running
Afghanistan yet again in Afghanistan
today if you ask Palestinians in Gaza
and in the West Bank how they feel about
Hamas there is far more support for that
group after October 7th and after two
months of Israeli uh War than there was
before October 7 so that's one way that
they're not safer the second way they're
not safer is they're losing
International support the Americans are
more isolated in supporting Israel and
opposing a ceasefire in the war today
than the Russians were when they invaded
Ukraine a couple of years ago and you
see that with the United Nations
security Council resolution and the
general assembly votes that have taken
place that's an astonishing thing to say
and in the United States Biden is under
a lot of pressure because a lot of his
supporters and especially young people
are increasingly sympathetic with the
Palestinian cause not with Israel and
indeed in recent polls astonishing to me
a majority of Young Americans Generation
Z Americans say that the attacks on
October 7th the terrorist attacks were
actually Justified so those are the two
ways that Israel is not safer but Steve
I want to be very clear you have a lot
of people that are saying Israel is
facing an existential threat and that's
not true either Israel is in the
strongest military position of any
country in the region a significant
nuclear force enormously well-trained
and technologically advanced military
border and surveillance capabilities far
more capacity to outgun and through Iron
Dome to defend against missile attack in
Israel than anybody else in the region
and it is true U that October 7th showed
the weaknesses of those defenses
especially if a government took its Eye
Off the Ball as nyaho did but I've had
so many lectures about how Israel is the
best place to invest longterm in the
Middle East for Pension funds and
institutional investors and then the
next hour those same leaders saying
Israel faces an existential threat both
of those things cannot simultaneously be
true the former is and still is and the
latter is politically expedient and we
need to recognize that well let me play
you a clip along those lines from
Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin who
had something to say about this crisis
let's listen it would compound this
tragedy if all that was waiting for the
Israeli people and your Palestinian
Neighbors at the end of this awful war
was more insecurity
Fury and
despair and those are very sobering
words from the United States Secretary
of Defense about the neighborhood you
just talked about risk you're one of the
greatest risk calculators I know is
Israel robbing itself in this moment of
that triaa you know gold star rating of
you know a relatively low-risk
investment for the rest of the World by
not taking an off-ramp uh to some of
what we've seen how is Israel playing
with its future here again you know kind
of less than you'd think Steve again
because no one's going to take away the
military support that the US is
providing Noah's going to take away the
technological capabilities that Israel
has I mean you know the people that are
fighting against Israel uh in the
Palestinians in Hamas are fighting from
a position of desperation the Israelis
are defending from a position of
strength and they're also occupying from
a position of strength so no I don't buy
the idea that Israel is suddenly going
to be existentially vulnerable to its
enemies not least because leaders in
Saudi Arabia and the UAE quietly are are
perfectly happy to see Hamas be
destroyed they can't say it publicly
Hamas is a problem for them the Arab
street is a problem for them and Saudi
Arabia would love to be in a position
where they could once again normalize
relations with Israel as they were just
about to do before October 7th just need
it to be more than window dressing for
the Palestinians given what's happened
for the last couple months so no I don't
buy that but I Do by the fact um that
Israel is more isolated today um and is
losing some of its international support
that has been hardfought over many
decades and look I'm sympathetic to the
fact that Israelis feel like they cannot
live next to a territory that is run by
a government that does not recognize
their right to exist I I I accept that I
accept that it cannot be sustainable for
the Israeli government to live next to a
Hamas Le Gaza but that is very different
than saying that they must destroy every
member of Hamas that's ever picked up a
rifle that they must destroy every
individual who has described loyalty or
FIY to that organization I don't think
it is accomplishable I think that the
civilian C have already been far too
high as a consequence of their efforts
to do that and I think they will lose
more than they gain from their own
population and more broadly do you think
there's a way after this conflict
subsides and it will subside it will end
at a mo at some moment where the
Palestinian Authority or the PLO or some
other entity that the United States
helps engineer in place will be able to
come in and govern Gaza come in and
govern the West Bank and move us forward
or do you think that's a pipe dream well
I mean the the idea of governing Gaza
when it's rubble and and and more than
50% of the population without homes you
can't govern that you have to uh rebuild
that before you can govern it uh you
have to construct it there has to be a
state there there's no State there right
now there's human Carnage so uh we we're
we're many many months probably years
away from when you would be able to talk
about governing two and a half million
people on the ground in Gaza but it will
need to happen and it will need to
happen with a plan for a sustainable
future for the Palestinians Israel has a
right to defend itself under every
circumstance so do the Palestinians the
Israelis have a capacity to defend
themselves as of right now the
Palestinians do not to do that you need
to have a govern that doesn't want to
destroy Israel and that also is capable
of governing its people without
corruption without stealing all of the
aid that's coming into them that is not
Hamas historically that has not been the
Palestinian Authority they haven't done
a very good job but there's nobody else
now the Americans are saying they want
the Palestinian Authority to provide
some Security even if not governance
right um the Israelis under nanyu are
saying no way no how I don't believe
that nanyu is going to be there for much
longer than another few months so it's
clear that you're not going to have that
kind of a solution with him in charge
but nobody thinks he should be running
Israel not least the Israeli citizens
once he's gone yeah I I think that's
part of a solution I think Egypt can be
part of a solution as well with a lot of
money uh provided by the Gulf States um
but this I think the United Nations can
be part of that solution but but Steve
we are very very far from that
conversation you know one of the things
I've been wondering is are we seeing an
escalation without noticing it um you've
recently written about the hooes um
drones that were short down 14 drones
that were shot down successful ballistic
missile attacks from the hotties on
shipping uh in the Red Sea and coming
out of the Suz canal and it is affecting
the decision on how some Commerce is
traveling is there an iran-backed
escalation right now that we're not
witnessing is this the hooes basically
taking independent action and do you
worry about that is that something as I
have to tell you in Washington there's
not been a lot of reaction to this but
when you look at the detail of what the
hotties have been able to do it's pretty
significant in my book what do you think
well you you asked me if there's Iran
backed uh escalation I think the answer
is yes you did not ask me if there was
Iran orchestrated escalation the answer
to that would be no and there there's a
very big gap between those two things
even if they are leading to the same
outcome now for the first six weeks of
this war the attacks we saw from the
houthis as well as from uh Shia militias
uh in Iraq and Syria also backed by Iran
were considered by the Americans
privately to be nuisance attacks they
weren't meant to kill soldiers they
weren't meant to really you know sort of
lead to any escalation uh they were just
kind of showing that these actors were
there their power powerful they could
cause problems in the future you know
you need to pay attention to them and
the American response was very
restrained targeted one attack a week
also meant to not really kill anybody
and certainly not get the Iranians
directly involved since then we have now
seen since the ceasefire the the
humanitarian pause when the hostages
were being exchanged and now the attacks
on Gaza have begun again in Earnest we
have now seen a significant escalation
from the houthis in particular who are
um attacking ships with the intention of
destroying them and sustained attacks on
American warships in the Red Sea that
has led some companies to stop shipping
through that area and instead a much
longer much more expensive route around
South Africa um and it's also led to
more significant American responses
though focused so far on economic
sanctions against some of those S as
opposed to military escalation the
Americans don't want the Iranians to get
directly involved in this war what we've
seen from the Iranians so far is they're
willing to keep the houthis on a pretty
Long Leash but that's very different
from you know wanting um to uh to have
this become a regional configration so
I'm like you Steve I'm more worried
today about that trajectory than I was
three weeks ago but I still think it is
less likely than more likely that we are
you know on the Tipping Point of a
regional uh War now you're seeing more
and more direct calls by the
administration for a change of game plan
by the Israelis in Gaza and I'm just
wondering and I asked this recently of
uh Egypt's foreign minister S shukri I
said is there a line that will trigger
some different action from Egypt in the
neighborhood and he said probably not
which means I'm wondering at what point
we stop watching the horror of what's
unfolding in in in Palestine and people
begin putting consequences into their
words now privately the Israelis had
told the Americans um that they had
learned lessons and that mistakes were
made in the first weeks of the bombing
campaign in the north of Gaza and that
that was going to lead to restraint and
a lot fewer civilian casualties well the
Biden Administration doesn't by that at
least from what they've seen so far and
Biden doesn't like or trust nanyu now um
the the Americans it's not surprising
Israel is the top Ally of uh the United
States in the region and they experien
the worst casualties the worst attacks
on the Jews that anyone had seen since
the Holocaust so it's not a surprise
that the American response is we're
going to CR any criticism we have we're
going to make to you privately we're not
going to air Dirty Laundry against our
friends uh publicly that also meant
vetos at the security Council and
carrying a lot of water for the Israelis
in multilateral diplomacy with the Gulf
States and with the Europeans and others
all of that has happened but I want to
bring you back Steve to 2015 when the
same nanahu was in power in Israel and
the Obama Administration with Biden were
pushing for an Iran nuclear deal the
jcpoa and nanyu who the top Ally of the
United States in the Middle East did not
not quietly tell Biden here's what I
really think you should do and here's
how we should work this and I want to
give you some advice no he flew to
Washington he gave a public speech to uh
the house and the Senate bipartisan
doing everything he could to sabotage to
torpedo the Iranian nuclear deal gave
interviews to American newspapers same
thing now that is not the way you behave
if you're the top Ally of the United
states in the region especially when
you're in a position of supplicant it's
not as if there's a power balance
between Israel and the United States and
and I think that Biden has had an
entirely too soft gloves approach with
Nan yahu I mean Biden is Israel's
biggest friend strongest friend most
committed friend for decades and decades
and he has been sitting there publicly
watching nyaho destroy aspects of that
position and that relationship in an
election year in the United United
States do you think that there is an
opportunity there still down the road
that the United States is hoping the
Saudis maybe other abrahamic courts
members are going to be the Rebuilders
of Gaza the stakeholders in Gaza or do
you think they're going to stay on the
sidelines like they've largely been
doing uh I I think the Saudis want to
play more of a leadership role and I
think they're they have a much better
relationship with the us right now in in
some ways paradoxically given the
Chinese engagement how much more energy
they're buying as well
um given what's happened uh between
Israel and and Hamas still um the the
Saudis are very interested in a nuclear
energy deal civilian nuclear energy deal
with the Americans that would also bring
inspectors onto the ground um into Saudi
Arabia with a fuel full fuel cycle uh
and that the Americans would provide
them with major non-nato uh Ally status
and ramp up uh the level of and
Technology of the weapon systems they're
providing the Saudis I think think that
that deal is absolutely still doable the
question is is uh Saudi normalization of
relations with Israel a part of that
deal right now it can't be with this
Israeli government it can't be and with
window dressing for the Palestinians
which would have been acceptable before
the war but that can't be you need to
have something much more substantive for
the Palestinians and the Saudis need to
be part of it needs to be a lot more
money and a lot more security and
stability on the ground than that deal
that was Inked in Bahrain that was a sop
for the Palestinians that allowed for
the Abraham Accords in the first place
under the Trump Administration let me
ask you um real quickly about David
Cameron um now foreign minister of the
UK and analina barcock of uh Germany
Germany's foreign minister are both
pushing hard for a resumption of the
deal making around hostages and a lot of
us have been looking at the hostage
politics in Israel and whether is any
Dimension there but more and more
international calls to get back into
that kind of deal making uh with Qatar
at the table uh the Israelis Hamas Etc
where do you think that might go the
French the Germans uh and the UK are now
calling for a sustainable ceasefire uh
between uh Israel and Hamas not an
immediate ceasefire but a sustainable
ceasefire that is a different position
from where the Americans are it's very
different from where the war went on
Russia Ukraine where the US was so
aligned with all of NATO here the US is
largely by itself and the Allies are
taking a position that's more akin to
what you see in the global South frankly
um they are also calling for the
immediate release of all hostages
everyone is saying that um but you've
gotten you've already released the
hostages that were easy to release and
were easy to negotiate for when you're
talking about men of fighting age it's a
lot harder and then Hamas is going to
drive a much tougher deal also with
Hamas getting blown up to a much greater
degree um you know they they
increasingly see that the Israelis War
cabin is willing to go after them
individually well there's not as much
reason for them to negotiate it's kind
of like the position that y fian had
when he finally decided to march on
Moscow it's not like that was a winning
strategy but he was kind of out of
options right so I mean if you're Hamas
right now you're willingness to
negotiate short of things that the
nanahu government are completely
unwilling to provide you really really
limited so you can call for this all you
want and there have been you know
General Assembly resolutions that have
demanded overwhelming majorities
demanding a ceasefire but also the
release of all hostages well Israel's
said no to one side but Hamas has said
very clear no to the
other well we always get a straight
Scoop from Ian Bremer Ian Bremer
president and founder of the political
risk consultancy the Eurasia group
really thank you so much for joining us
today good see you steeve so what's the
bottom line from America's perspective
Israel's future in security have sort of
been dealt with as a sacred issue that
couldn't be disussed with the same kind
of give and take that say the security
of Europe is discussed that's one of the
reasons why a state of Palestine or
Justice for Palestinians has been a
third rail Topic in America for decades
but that may just be changing the US
defense secretary is warning out loud
that Israel may suffer strategic defeat
and young people in America are dismiss
made by what they're seeing and they're
promising to withhold support from
President Joe Biden this crisis is
changing and affecting American politics
that doesn't mean the equation of us
support for Israel's structural
indifference to Palestine changes
tomorrow but it does mean the equation
is no longer cost- free it means more
Americans are paying attention and the
past belief that palestine's future
could be shoved out of view and under
the rug is just no longer viable maybe
just maybe a different world is shaping
up and that's the bottom
[Music]
line